blip-0026: L402 - Lightning HTTP 402 Protocol (#26)
lightning/blips: blip-0026.md

such as credit cards. With the rise of Bitcoin, and the Lightning Network, the
Internet now has a native digital currency and a low-cost, low-latency, high
volume payment system to enable highly scalable payments over open payment
infrastructure.

This document specifies the L402 protocol which utilizes the 402 status code,
macaroons, the Lightning Network, and special authorization headers to create a
native payment-metering system for the Web. An L402 credential can serve both
as authentication, as well as a payment mechanism \(one can view it as a
ticket\) for paid APIs. By leveraging L402, a service or business is able to
offer a new tier of paid APIs that sit between free, and subscription: pay as
you go.

One can view L402 credential (a macaroon) as a fancy authentication credential
or cookie. They differ from regular cookies in that they're a cryptographically
verifiable bearer credential. An L402 credential _encodes_ all its capabilities
within a macaroon which can only be created by the end service provider. The
L402 specification uses a combination of `HTTP` as well as the Lightning Network
to create a seamless end-to-end payment+authentication flow for the

> next-generation of paid APIs built on top of the Lightning Network.

Reviewer: This wasn't addressed.

As L402 leverages the Lightning Network for its payment capabilities, they also
enable the easy creation of _metered_ APIs. A metered API is one where the user
is able to pay for the target resource or service as they go rather than
needing to commit to a subscription up front. Developers can use L402 to create
applications that charge users on an on going basis for resources like compute
or disk space. If the user stops paying, then the resource can be suspended,
collected, and re-allocated for another paying user. Once again, as the
standard supports _gRPC_ which supports _bi directional streaming_ APIs, one
could even create a metered streaming video or audio service as well!

Additionally, L402 also enables innovation at the API _architecture_ level. One
example is automated tier upgrades. Many APIs typically offer several tiers
which allow users to gain access to more or additional resources as they climb
up the ladder. Typically, a user must _manually_ navigate a web-page to request
an upgrade to a higher tier, or downgrade to a lower tier. With the L402
standard, tier upgrades can easily be automated: the user hits a new endpoint

> to obtain an _upgraded_ L402 which _encodes_ additional functionality or

Reviewer 2: Just noting this part here wrt to the conversations about if macaroons are implementation detail or part of the spec. Using macaroons for the token is part of what makes this possible since [attenuation](https://hackingdistributed.com/2014/05/16/macaroons-are-better-than-cookies/) like this is part of the design goal of macaroons.

increased resource access compared to the prior tier. Services can even
leverage L402 for A/B Testing by giving subsets of users a distinct L402 which
when submitted to the service, render a slightly different version of the
target resource or service.

# Rationale

# Specification

## Authentication Flow

This section explains the high-level authentication flow from the perspective
of a user and their client software.

This diagram outlines the high level authentication flow for the protocol:
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant L as Lightning Node
    participant C as Client
    participant S as Server
    C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
    S->>C: HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
    Note over S: WWW-Authenticate: L402 macaroon=X invoice=Y
    C->>L: Pay invoice
    L->>C: Returns pre-image
    C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
    Note over C: Authorization: L402 macaroon:preimage
    S->>S: Verify L402 authorization
    S->>C: HTTP/1.1 200 OK
```

HTTP-based protocol flow:

1. A client hits an `HTTP` endpoint to fetch a resource.

2. The server decides that payment is required to access the endpoint. They
   return a HTTP status code of `402` along with a `WWW-Authenticate` header

>    containing a macaroon and invoice. The macaroon commits to the payment hash

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   containing a token and invoice. Ideally, the token commits to the payment hash
```

   of the invoice `H`.

3. The client pays the invoice over the Lightning Network and receives the
   payment pre-image `r` to the payment hash `H`, `H = sha256(r)`

4. The client re-issues the request with a `Authorization` header that includes

>    the payment preimage `r`, and the macaroon sent by the server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   the payment preimage `r`, and the token sent by the server.
```

5. The server verifies the cryptographically verifies the authenticity and

>    integrity of the macaroon, then ensures the payment hash committed to in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   integrity of the token, then ensures the payment hash committed to in the
```

>    macaroon `H`, satisfies the relation the `H = sha256(r)`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   token `H`, satisfies the relation the `H = sha256(r)`.
```

6. The server returns a 200 OK error code along with the specified resource.

> If the service supports persistent L402 credential re-use, then a client SHOULD

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the service supports persistent L402 token re-use, then a client SHOULD
```

?? not sure about this one. Do you mean something other than the auth/hmac token here?

store the credential as it can be re-used without repeating the initialization
step. As seen below, credentials can be easily revoked by the server, expire,
and even contain structured information that encodes the capabilities of a
credential.

### Reusing Credentials

L402 is intended to be reused until they are revoked and the server issues a
new challenge in response to a client request containing a newly invalid L402.
Possible revocation conditions include: expiry date, exceeded N usages, volume
of usages in a certain time period necessitating a tier upgrade, and
potentially others \(discussed further in the higher-level design document\).

L402 could be configured for use on a per-backend-service basis or for all
exposed services. As an example, the same L402 credential may commit to
capabilities enabling a user to access both service `Y` and `X from the same
endpoint. This flexibility is afforded because all services are going to be

> gated by the same L402 proxy, which verifies all macaroons for all backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
gated by the same L402 proxy, which verifies all credentials for all backend
```

services.

### Security Considerations

If a client’s L402 is intercepted by Mallory, which is possible if the
transmission is not encrypted in some way such as TLS, the L402 can be used by
Mallory and the L402 proxy would not be able to distinguish this usage as
illicit.

L402 authentication is also vulnerable to spoofing by counterfeit servers. If a
client slightly mistypes the URL of a desired backend service, they become
vulnerable to spoofing attacks if connecting to a server that maliciously
stores their L402 and uses it for their own purposes. This attack could be
addressed by requiring the user of the L402 to have a specific IP address.
However, there are downsides to this approach; for example, if a user switches
WiFi networks, their credential becomes unusable.

## L402 HTTP/gRPC Protocol Specification

### Server HTTP Authentication Headers

In order to signal that L402 authentication is required, the server sends a
[RFC-7235](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7235#section-4.1)
authentication challenge. A challenge takes the form of:
```
WWW-Authenticate: challenge
```

For the L402 protocol the challenge takes the following form:
```

> L402 macaroon="X", invoice="Y"

Reviewer 4: Are the `"` needed? 

[Aperture](https://github.com/lightninglabs/aperture/blob/master/l402/header.go#L32), [Fewsats](https://github.com/Fewsats/fewsatscli/blob/main/credentials/credentials.go#L77) and  [lsat-js](https://github.com/Tierion/lsat-js/blob/master/src/lsat.ts#L20) do not add them but [Sulu](https://github.com/sulusolutions/l402-ts/blob/main/src/client/axios.ts#L68) does. I think it is because of how it is specified here. 

If I could choose, I would say let's go without them.

Reviewer 5: I think you are referring to two different things here @positiveblue . From what I see Aperture does add the `"` double-quotes when generating the "challenge" header, as can be seen [here](https://github.com/lightninglabs/aperture/blob/3a8936c4480425c0dd40a4b97864510a0fd78cc4/auth/authenticator.go#L110). Sulu replicates this functionality, as does [lsat-js](https://github.com/Tierion/lsat-js/blob/d902b9553bfb371f3c74773a80d65d3b35c50a81/src/lsat.ts#L30C3-L33C4). 

It is the challenge response with the L402 token that does not use `"`  , as can be seen in the [code ](https://github.com/lightninglabs/aperture/blob/master/l402/header.go#L32) from Aperture. Sulu does the [same](https://github.com/sulusolutions/l402-ts/blob/e08be22ceec5a5c2ab5733de9c2dcb0efa212707/src/client/axios.ts#L41).

I think the use of `"` in the www-authenticate header, while to my knowledge not strictly necessary, its actually quite typical. See for example:
- [RFC 6750](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6750#section-3) Bearer Auth Scheme
- [RFC 7617](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7617#section-2) Basic Auth Scheme

See also [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/WWW-Authenticate).

In my opinion we should keep with standard practices here, so I see no problem maintaining the `"` for the www-authenticate header.

Reviewer 4: You are right, I was following this diagram and checked the wrong header:

```
sequenceDiagram
     participant L as Lightning Node
     participant C as Client
     participant S as Server
     C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
     S->>C: HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
     Note over S: WWW-Authenticate: L402 macaroon=X invoice=Y
     C->>L: Pay invoice
     L->>C: Returns pre-image
     C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
     Note over C: Authorization: L402 macaroon:preimage
     S->>S: Verify L402 authorization
     S->>C: HTTP/1.1 200 OK
 ```

I see that [even aperture does it that way too](https://github.com/lightninglabs/aperture/blob/3a8936c4480425c0dd40a4b97864510a0fd78cc4/auth/authenticator.go#L110C2-L111C63) 

Case closed

```

where:

* `Y`: is the Lightning Network invoice a client MUST pay in order to obtain
  a pre-image required to complete the `Authenticate` header.

* `X`: is the macaroon credential that encodes the client's capabilities, and
  also cryptographically commits to the payment hash `H` of the invoice `Y`.

### Client HTTP Authentication Headers

This section defines the client-side L402 authentication headers, which

> transmits credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transmits credentials as `<token(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage
```

> is encoded as hex and the macaroon is encoded as base64. Multiple macaroons are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is encoded as hex and the token is either encoded as base64 or hex. Multiple tokens are
```

> is encoded as hex and the macaroon is encoded as base64. Multiple macaroons are

Author: The server sends it as base64 already. If the client knows what kind of macaroon/token was sent, then it can decode it itself to understand what capabilities it has.

> base64 encoded individually and listed comma separated before the colon.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
encoded individually and listed comma separated before the colon.  
```

The L402 authentication scheme is based on the model that the client needs to

> authenticate itself with a macaroon and invoice preimage for each backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
authenticate itself with a token and invoice preimage for each backend
```

service it wants to access. The server will service the request only if it can

> validate the macaroon and preimage for the particular backend service

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
validate the access token and preimage for the particular backend service
```

requested.

The L402 authentication scheme utilizes the Authentication Framework specified
in [_RFC 7235_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235) as follows.

In challenges: the scheme name is "L402". Note that the scheme name is
case-insensitive. For credentials, the syntax is:

> `macaroons` → [_&lt;base64 encoding&gt;_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3), comma separated if multiple macaroons are present

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`auth tokens` → [_&lt;hex | base64 encoding&gt;_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-3), comma separated if multiple auth tokens are present
```

`preimage` → [_&lt;hex encoding&gt;_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3548#section-6)

> `token` → macaroons ":" preimage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`L402 credential` → auth tokens ":" preimage
```

> Specifically, the syntax for "token" specified above is used, which can be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, the syntax for "L402 credential" specified above is used, which can be
```

considered comparable to the [_"token68"
syntax_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-2.1) used for HTTP basic
auth.

A valid client authorization header takes the form:
```

> Authorization: L402 macaroon:preimage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authorization: L402 token:preimage
```

```

### HTTP Protocol Flow Specification

In this section, we specify the protocol for the HTTP portion of the L402
proxy.

#### Server Flow

Upon receipt of a request for a URI of an L402-proxied backend service that
lacks credentials or contains an L402 that is invalid or insufficient in some
way:

> 1. Ths server SHOULD derive a economical price for the endpoint expressed in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Ths server SHOULD derive an economical price for the endpoint expressed in
```

   milli-satoshis (1/1000th of a satoshi) and create a BOLT 11 invoice `P`
   requesting that amount to its backing Lightning Node.

> 2. The server MUST create a new authentiation credential `M` for the client

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The server MUST create a new auth token `T` for the client
```

   that will only become valid once the client pays the LN invoice.

>     3.1. The server SHOULD ensure that the authentiation credential commits to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    3.1. The server SHOULD ensure that the auth token commits to
```

    the payment hash, as this enables fast stateless verification of each
    incoming credential. Otherwise a backend loop up, or a large amount of
    state may be required to validate all past, current, and future
    credentials.

3. The server MUST reply with a challenge using the 402 \(Payment Required\)
   status code. **Officially, in the HTTP RFC documentation, status code 402
   is** [_**"reserved for future
   use"**_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.2)  **-- but this
   document assumes the future has arrived.**

4.  Alongside the 402 status code, the server MUST should specify the
    `WWW-Authenticate` header \([_\[RFC7235\], Section
    4.1_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-4.1)\) field to indicate
    the L402 authentication scheme and the macaroon needed for the client to
    form a complete L402.

>     A valid response header MUST take the form of:

Author: SGTM.

    ```

>     WWW-Authenticate: L402 macaroon="M", invoice="P"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    WWW-Authenticate: L402 token="T", invoice="P"
```

>     WWW-Authenticate: L402 macaroon="M", invoice="P"

Author: Will update to mention it's BOLT 11. Whenever the bolt 12 invoice format becomes its own thing, we can update the language here to reflect the existence of both.

    ```

    An example L402 HTTP response resembles: 

    ```text
    HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required

    Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT

>     WWW-Authenticate: L402 macaroon="AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==", invoice="lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp5fu6xhthlt2vucmzkx6c7wtlh2r625r30cyjsfqhu8rsx4xpz5lwqdpa2fjkzep6yptksct5yp5hxgrrv96hx6twvusycn3qv9jx7ur5d9hkugr5dusx6cqzpgxqr23s79ruapxc4j5uskt4htly2salw4drq979d7rcela9wz02elhypmdzmzlnxuknpgfyfm86pntt8vvkvffma5qc9n50h4mvqhngadqy3ngqjcym5a"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    WWW-Authenticate: L402 token="AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==", invoice="lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp5fu6xhthlt2vucmzkx6c7wtlh2r625r30cyjsfqhu8rsx4xpz5lwqdpa2fjkzep6yptksct5yp5hxgrrv96hx6twvusycn3qv9jx7ur5d9hkugr5dusx6cqzpgxqr23s79ruapxc4j5uskt4htly2salw4drq979d7rcela9wz02elhypmdzmzlnxuknpgfyfm86pntt8vvkvffma5qc9n50h4mvqhngadqy3ngqjcym5a"
```

    ```

>     where `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="` is the macaroon that the client

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    where `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="` is the auth token that the client
```

    MUST include for each of its authorized requests and
    `"lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp..."` is the invoice the client must pay to reveal the
    preimage that must be included for each of its authorized requests.

Upon receiving an HTTP request with a valid RFC-7235 `Authorization` header as
defined in the Client HTTP Authentication Headers section:

1. The server MUST verify the cryptographic authenticity and integrity of the
   credential.
  1.1. If a credential is invalid, then the server MUST return a 401
  Unauthorized status code.

> 2. The server MUST parse out the `Authorization` header (`macaroon:preimage`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The server MUST parse out the `Authorization` header (`auth token:preimage`)
```

>    into a `M` the encoded credential, and `r` the payment preimage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   into a `T` the encoded auth token, and `r` the payment preimage.
```

> 3. The server MUST verify that the BOLT 11 invoice tied to the credential `M`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. The server MUST verify that the BOLT 11 invoice tied to the auth token `T`
```

   has been paid.

>    3.1. If the server committed to the payment hash `H` in the credential `M`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   3.1. If the server committed to the payment hash `H` in the auth token `T`,
```

   then they can simply verify that `H = sha256(r)`.
   3.2. Otherwise, the server should verify that the invoice `P` has been paid
   in full.
4. If the invoice has not been paid in full, then the server MUST return an 401
   Unauthorized header. Otherwise, the server SHOULD process the request
   itself, or pass it on to the proxied backend.

Regarding step 3.1 and 3.2, it's imperative that the server ensure that the
invoice has been paid in full before processing the response, or proxying it to
a backend. As stated above, by cryptographically commiting to the payment hash,
the server can implement fast stateless verification of the payment
hash+preimage relation.

#### Client Flow

Upon receiving a valid L402 `WWW-Authorization` header the client:

1. Should verify that the contained BOLT 11 invoice doesn't request an
   excessive amount of Bitcoin.

> 1.1. If so, then the client SHOULD abandon the HTTP request.

Reviewer 4: format: same here

2. After validating the returned BOLT 11 invoice, the client MUST pay the
   invoice over the LN to receive the payment pre-image `r`.
3. The client then constructs a valid `Authentication` header with the
   following form:

>    `Authorization: L402 macaroon:preimage`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   `Authorization: L402 auth_token:preimage`
```

4. The client then re-issues the original HTTP request with the attached L402
   `Authorization` header.

In other words, to receive authorization, the client:

* Pays the invoice from the server, thus revealing the invoice’s preimage

> * Constructs the L402 by concatenating the base64-encoded macaroon\(s\), a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Constructs the L402 by concatenating the encoded auth token\(s\), a
```

  single colon \(":"\), and the hex-encoded preimage.

> Since the macaroon and the preimage are both binary data encoded in an ASCII

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the auth token and the preimage are both binary data encoded in an ASCII
```

based format, there should be no problem with either containing control
characters or colons \(see "CTL" in [_Appendix B.1 of
\[RFC5234\]_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5234#appendix-B.1)\). If a user

> provides a macaroon or preimage containing any of these characters, this is to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
provides an auth token or preimage containing any of these characters, this is to
```

be considered an invalid L402 and SHOULD result in a 402 and authentication
information as specified above.

> If a client wishes to send the macaroon `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a client wishes to send the auth token `"AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg=="`
```

3.1 The server MUST reply with a challenge using the 200 OK status code.
4. Along side normal `WWW-Authenticate` header, the server MUST send the
   following trailing headers:

   * `Grpc-Message: payment required`
   * `Grpc-Status`: 13 # Internal

   As an example:
    ```text
    HTTP/2 200 OK
    Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT
    Content-Type: application/grpc
    …
    Grpc-Message: payment required
    Grpc-Status: 13
    ```

#### Client Flow

The gRPC flow for the client is identical to the HTTP flow, with one addition:
3.1. The client MUST also transmit the final macaroon as `Custom-Metadata`,
with a key of "macaroon" and value of the serialized macaroon.

All other gRPC headers and trailers are required as normal; more information
can be found in the [_gRPC over HTTP2
specification_](https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/PROTOCOL-HTTP2.md).

# Universality

# Backwards Compatibility

The `L402` protocol was formerly known as `LSAT`. In order to preserve
backwards compatibility with clients, anywhere `L402` is used within HTTP
headers or requests, a valid protocol flow with the string `LSAT` should also

> be accepted.

Reviewer 2: 🎉

# Appendix 

## Macaroon Minting & Verification

In this section, we outline the specification of the macaroon component of a
Lightning API key \(L402\). To recap, an L402 is composed of a macaroon, which
specifies the allowed capabilities of the credential, and a preimage, which
serves as the credential’s proof of payment. Macaroons are perfect candidates
for L402 as they are tamper-proof, support easy rotation, have attributes, and
can even be further attenuated in order for applications that integrate an L402
enabled service to delegate any additional capabilities. We’ll cover how
macaroons are created, attenuated, and verified as part of L402. This chapter
will require an understanding of how macaroons work and how they are useful in
the context of authentication. It may be useful to skim the [introductory

> research paper on macaroons](https://research.google/pubs/pub41892/).

Reviewer 2: Might be good to reference some implementations as well. Not all of them are interoperable unfortunately, so highlighting ones that are standard compliant would be useful as well as for further reference on how they work which can be helpful to understanding.

### Minting Macaroons

Macaroons have three basic components: a public identifier that maps to a root
key, a list of caveats \(which is how attenuation is achieved\), and a
signature. Minting a new macaroon only requires the public identifier and the
root key it corresponds to.

Each macaroon must have its own cryptographically random root key that must not
be disclosed to prevent forgeability of macaroons. Each root key consists of 32
bytes, which provides a reasonable tradeoff between entropy and size. Root keys
are essential to the verification of macaroons, so they must be stored securely
and reliably.

> #### Macaroon Identifier

Reviewer 4: I think we may be over specifying a bit here.

Why wouldn't `user_id`/`macaroon_version` be caveats? 

An L402 credentials are linked to a specific challenge (invoice) and what identifies that invoice is the `payment_hash` so I would go with that in my implementation and leave everything else to caveats.

Not sure why this needs to be specified though? Unlike [biscuits](https://www.biscuitsec.org), macaroons can only be validated by the issuer, so the id should be whatever the issuer wants without encoding extra information/encoding whatever the issuer wants.

required permissions to access the service.

The first step ensures a macaroon was minted by the minter and it has not been
tampered with. This is done by computing the HMAC chain of the macaroon,
starting from its root key and identifier, and including any further
attenuation through its caveats to arrive at the terminal signature of the
macaroon. If these do not match, the macaroon is invalid. If there isn’t a
valid root key corresponding to the macaroon, it is also considered invalid.

The second step ensures a macaroon has provided a valid proof of payment
\(preimage\) and is performed by the minter as well. Since macaroons commit to
the payment hash of an invoice, this is a trivial step.

The final step ensures a macaroon is authorized to access a service. This is
done by ensuring the service-specific caveat predicates of a macaroon hold true
for the service being accessed. If only one of these caveats doesn’t hold true,
then the macaroon is invalid. In the case of an unknown caveat, its evaluation
must be skipped by the authorizer as the macaroon holder can further attenuate
the macaroon for other applications.

> ### Macaroon Revocation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Auth Token Revocation
```

To prevent abusers of a macaroon-based authenticated service, a macaroon should
be able to be revoked. This can be achieved by having the minter remove the

> macaroon’s corresponding root key. By doing so, the minter will never be able

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately this makes the system somewhat less stateless :-/

Author: It's purely optional, otherwise you can implement time based revocation just via a caveat expiry. I think it also depends on the service, some may be able to get away with a single global service key, while others may already require per user/account keys for the macaroons. In theory, you can have the best of both worlds if a deterministic scheme is used to derivation of the symmetric keys.

    * [Macaroon Verification](#macaroon-verification)
    * [Macaroon Revocation](#macaroon-revocation)
* [Reference Implementation](#reference-implementation)

# Abstract

L402 is a protocol standard based on the HTTP 402 Payment Required status code
designed to support the use case of charging for services and authenticating
users in distributed networks. The L402 protocol is a concrete instantiation of
a Lightning Network based micro-paywall for HTTP/gRPC APIs on the web. A
supporting server signals that a payment is required for an endpoint by sending
a special `WWW-Authenticate` header along with a 402 status code. This header
encodes an authentication token \(the L402 credential\), and a Lightning
Network invoice. In order to traverse the L402-enabled endpoint, the client
then pays the Lightning Network invoice, and presents the `(token, preimage)`
tuple to the server in their next request via an HTTP `Authorization` header.
Critically, the L402 token MUST cryptographically commit to the payment hash of
the LN invoice sent by the server proxy. This commitment structure enables the
server to easily verify that a client has properly paid for the endpoint in a

> stateless manner, providing in-band payment authentication.

Reviewer 4: > Critically, the L402 token MUST cryptographically commit to the payment hash of
the LN invoice sent by the server proxy. This commitment structure enables the
server to easily verify that a client has properly paid for the endpoint in a
stateless manner, providing in-band payment authentication.

I think we are constraining the protocol way too much here. From "proof of payment in the request" to "the proof of payment is the preiamge of a lightning invoice" to "the token contains all the information to be able to verify this in a stateless way"

Reviewer: Yea, this isn't required to implement it. The server could validate the payment on its end if it wants (I mean it shouldn't, but it definitely can). There's no need to specify this, let alone in an "abstract".

> The L402 protocol is token-format agnostic: any authentication token that can

Reviewer 4: The same thing that "forced" use to say "token agnostic" should apply to "payment method agnostic"

Reviewer: Rewriting this to be "payment method agnostic" seems way out of scope. The point of this document is to describe a thing that is already deployed, not to invent a new payment protocol.

commit to a payment hash may be used. Macaroons (HMAC chain based bearer
credentials) are the RECOMMENDED token format due to their support for

> delegation, attenuation of capabilities, and stateless verification. See the

Reviewer 4: > Macaroons (HMAC chain based bearer
credentials) are the RECOMMENDED token format due to their support for
delegation, attenuation of capabilities, and stateless verification.

This is great but orthogonal to the things a payment protocol/flow should care about

[Appendix](#appendix) for a full specification of the macaroon-based token
format.

> The L402 protocol can be implemented as a simple reverse-proxy in front of a

Reviewer 4: This assumes "all request need to go through here"

The current flows do not follow this at all.

A) I do not handle payments and delegate to a third party SOMETIMES (only when a payment is involved) and that third party tells me when a payment was processed (e.g: stripe)
B) I check if a payment was received (polling my Lightning node, checking a chain, pulling the latest transactions in my bank account, etc...)

Also, most of the time I have an state in the service (subscribed as Free, Premium, Pro or a number of credits etc...)

The payment changes the state but the client SHOULD NOT have to show a proof of payment every time

traditional HTTP/gRPC based backend. The proxy handles the minting +
verification of the L402 credentials, decoupling the authentication layer from
the target web service backends. In more advanced deployments, a backend may
introspect into the L402 token structure to enforce capability verification,
and even dynamically communicate with the proxy to dictate real-time pricing in
an automated fashion.

> The L402 protocol gets its name from the HTTP status code 402: Payment

Reviewer 4: <3

able to fetch/interact with the resources at a given HTTP endpoint. The 402
status code thus presented a way to enable HTTP-native payment metered APIs on
the Web. With the rise of Bitcoin, and the Lightning Network, the Internet now
has a native digital currency and a low-cost, low-latency, high volume payment
system to enable highly scalable payments over open payment infrastructure.

An L402 credential can serve both as authentication, as well as a payment
mechanism \(one can view it as a ticket\) for paid APIs. By using L402, a
service or business is able to offer a new tier of paid APIs that sit between
free, and subscription: pay as you go.

One can view an L402 credential as a fancy authentication credential or cookie.
They differ from regular cookies in that they're a cryptographically verifiable
bearer credential. An L402 credential _encodes_ all its capabilities within a
token which can only be created by the end service provider. The L402
specification uses a combination of `HTTP` as well as the Lightning Network to
create a seamless end-to-end payment+authentication flow for the
next-generation of paid APIs built on top of the Lightning Network.

> ## Example Applications and Use Cases

Reviewer: I'm not sure what the value of this section is after the abstract.

Author: Example use cases.

resource access compared to the prior tier. Services can even use L402 for A/B
Testing by giving subsets of users a distinct L402 which when submitted to the
service, render a slightly different version of the target resource or service.

# Rationale

# Specification

## Authentication Flow

This section explains the high-level authentication flow from the perspective
of a user and their client software.

This diagram outlines the high level authentication flow for the protocol:
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant L as Lightning Node
    participant C as Client
    participant S as Server
    C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
    S->>C: HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
    Note over S: WWW-Authenticate: L402 version="0", token="X", invoice="Y"
    C->>L: Pay invoice
    L->>C: Returns pre-image
    C->>S: GET HTTP/1.1 Request
    Note over C: Authorization: L402 token:preimage
    S->>S: Verify L402 authorization
    S->>C: HTTP/1.1 200 OK
```

HTTP-based protocol flow:

1. A client hits an `HTTP` endpoint to fetch a resource.

2. The server decides that payment is required to access the endpoint. They
   return a HTTP status code of `402` along with a `WWW-Authenticate` header

>    containing a token and invoice. The token MUST commit to the payment hash

Reviewer: again this doesn't need to be specified.

Author: That the token must commit to the payment hash? It's one of the key aspects of the protocol that enables ~stateless verification!

   of the invoice `H`.

3. The client pays the invoice over the Lightning Network and receives the
   payment pre-image `r` to the payment hash `H`, `H = sha256(r)`

4. The client re-issues the request with an `Authorization` header that
   includes the payment preimage `r`, and the token sent by the server.

> 5. The server cryptographically verifies the authenticity and integrity of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The server verifies the authenticity and integrity of the
```

   token, then ensures the payment hash committed to in the token `H`,
   satisfies the relation `H = sha256(r)`.

6. The server returns a 200 OK status code along with the specified resource.

> If the service supports persistent L402 token re-use, then a client SHOULD

Reviewer: How does a client know to do this? Its not signaled. Presumably the client should always do it and if they get another 402 they have to pay again.

Author: Few ways:
  * They're able to introspect into the token itself, and can ascertain w/e their remaining allotment is. 
  * They try again, and get another 402, GOTO 1. 
  * Server can signal some other manifest page, or have an `/info` endpoint (or w/e) where it returns structure info re the submitted token.

store the credential as it can be re-used without repeating the initialization
step. As seen below, credentials can be easily revoked by the server, expire,
and even contain structured information that encodes the capabilities of a
credential.

### Reusing Credentials

L402 credentials are intended to be reused until they are revoked and the
server issues a new challenge in response to a client request containing a
newly invalid L402. Possible revocation conditions include: expiry date,
exceeded N usages, volume of usages in a certain time period necessitating a
tier upgrade, and potentially others \(discussed further in the higher-level
design document\).

L402 could be configured for use on a per-backend-service basis or for all
exposed services. As an example, the same L402 credential may commit to
capabilities enabling a user to access both service `Y` and `X` from the same
endpoint. This flexibility is afforded because all services are going to be
gated by the same L402 proxy, which verifies all credentials for all backend
services.

> 

Reviewer: Not sure what any of this adds. Yes, the service can issue different tokens for different things or a single token for different things.

Author: >  As an example, the same L402 credential may commit tocapabilities enabling a user to access both service `Y` and `X` from the same endpoint.

Fine grained auth.

### Security Considerations

If a client's L402 is intercepted by Mallory, which is possible if the
transmission is not encrypted in some way such as TLS, the L402 can be used by
Mallory and the L402 proxy would not be able to distinguish this usage as
illicit.

L402 authentication is also vulnerable to spoofing by counterfeit servers. If a
client slightly mistypes the URL of a desired backend service, they become
vulnerable to spoofing attacks if connecting to a server that maliciously
stores their L402 and uses it for their own purposes.

> Because L402 tokens support attenuation through caveats, this class of attack

Reviewer: No they dont, they're generic now.

can be mitigated by cryptographically binding the token to client-specific
details. For example, a server (or the client itself, via self-attenuation)
could add caveats that restrict the token's validity to a particular IP
address, TLS client certificate fingerprint, origin domain, or other
client-identifying predicate. The server then verifies these caveats upon
each request, ensuring a stolen token cannot be replayed from a different
context. Each binding predicate carries its own tradeoffs: an IP caveat
prevents use after a network change, while a TLS client cert fingerprint
requires the client to maintain a stable key pair. Deployments should choose
binding predicates appropriate to their threat model.

## L402 HTTP/gRPC Protocol Specification

### HTTP Protocol Flow Specification

> In this section, we specify the protocol for the HTTP portion of the L402

Reviewer: Why is this even separate from the client spec? Its the same thing...

   will only become valid once the client pays the LN invoice.

   1. The token MUST commit to the payment hash `H` of the invoice `P`. This
      commitment is what provides in-band payment authentication: the server
      can verify that a client has paid using only the token and the preimage,
      without any backend lookup or additional state. Without this commitment,
      the server would need to maintain a large amount of state to validate all
      past, current, and future credentials.

3. The server MUST reply with a challenge using the 402 \(Payment Required\)
   status code. **Officially, in the HTTP RFC documentation, status code 402
   is** [_**"reserved for future
   use"**_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.2) **-- but this
   document assumes the future has arrived.**

4. Alongside the 402 status code, the server MUST specify the
   `WWW-Authenticate` header \([_\[RFC7235\], Section
   4.1_](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-4.1)\) field to indicate
   the L402 authentication scheme and the token needed for the client to form a
   complete L402.

   A valid response header MUST take the form of:
   ```

>    WWW-Authenticate: L402 version="0", token="T", invoice="P"

Reviewer: Why doesn't this appear in the client section?

   ```

   Where:

   * `version`: A protocol version string. The current version is `"0"`.
     Clients MUST ignore unknown key=value parameters in the challenge header,
     to allow future extensions to the protocol \(e.g., alternative invoice
     formats\).

   * `token`: The authentication token, encoded as base64. The token MUST
     commit to the payment hash `H` of the invoice `P`.

   * `invoice`: A [BOLT 11](https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/11-payment-encoding.md)
     payment request that the client MUST pay in order to obtain the preimage
     required to complete the `Authorization` header.

   An example L402 HTTP response resembles:

   ```text
   HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required

   Date: Mon, 04 Feb 2014 16:50:53 GMT

>    WWW-Authenticate: L402 version="0", token="AGIAJEemVQUTEyNCR0exk7ek90Cg==", invoice="lnbc1500n1pw5kjhmpp5fu6xhthlt2vucmzkx6c7wtlh2r625r30cyjsfqhu8rsx4xpz5lwqdpa2fjkzep6yptksct5yp5hxgrrv96hx6twvusycn3qv9jx7ur5d9hkugr5dusx6cqzpgxqr23s79ruapxc4j5uskt4htly2salw4drq979d7rcela9wz02elhypmdzmzlnxuknpgfyfm86pntt8vvkvffma5qc9n50h4mvqhngadqy3ngqjcym5a"

Reviewer: Wait, did we rename `macaroon` to `token` in the wire encoding? That would break existing impls right?

Author: See backwards compat section.

1. The server MUST verify the cryptographic authenticity and integrity of the
   credential.
   1. If a credential is invalid, then the server MUST return a 401
      Unauthorized status code.
2. The server MUST parse out the `Authorization` header \(`token:preimage`\)
   into `T` the base64-encoded token, and `r` the hex-encoded payment
   preimage.
3. The server MUST verify that the BOLT 11 invoice tied to the token `T` has
   been paid.
   1. If the server committed to the payment hash `H` in the token `T`,
      then they can simply verify that `H = sha256(r)`.
   2. Otherwise, the server should verify that the invoice `P` has been paid
      in full.
4. If the invoice has not been paid in full, then the server MUST return a 401
   Unauthorized header. Otherwise, the server SHOULD process the request
   itself, or pass it on to the proxied backend.

Regarding step 3.1 and 3.2, it's imperative that the server ensure that the
invoice has been paid in full before processing the response, or proxying it to
a backend. As stated above, by cryptographically committing to the payment
hash, the server can implement fast stateless verification of the payment
hash+preimage relation.

> #### Client Flow

Reviewer: We already specified the client above!

Upon receiving a valid L402 `WWW-Authenticate` header the client:

1. Should verify that the contained BOLT 11 invoice doesn't request an
   excessive amount of Bitcoin.
   1. If so, then the client SHOULD abandon the HTTP request.
2. After validating the returned BOLT 11 invoice, the client MUST pay the
   invoice over the LN to receive the payment pre-image `r`.
3. The client then constructs a valid `Authorization` header with the
   following form:

>    `Authorization: L402 <base64(token)>:<hex(preimage)>`

Reviewer: I assume you don't intend the client to base64-encode the token it already received?

applications that charge users on an on going basis for resources like compute
or disk space. If the user stops paying, then the resource can be suspended,
collected, and re-allocated for another paying user. Once again, as the
standard supports _gRPC_ which supports _bi directional streaming_ APIs, one
could even create a metered streaming video or audio service as well!

Additionally, L402 also enables innovation at the API _architecture_ level. One
example is automated tier upgrades. Many APIs typically offer several tiers
which allow users to gain access to more or additional resources as they climb
up the ladder. Typically, a user must _manually_ navigate a web-page to request
an upgrade to a higher tier, or downgrade to a lower tier. With the L402
standard, tier upgrades can easily be automated: the user hits a new endpoint
to obtain an _upgraded_ L402 which _encodes_ additional functionality or
increased resource access compared to the prior tier. Services can even
leverage L402 for A/B Testing by giving subsets of users a distinct L402 which
when submitted to the service, render a slightly different version of the

> target resource or service.

Reviewer 6: I think it's helpful to have a historical story to grab the "background" quickly.

Though, considering that this is a bLIP, certainly, I also feel that the subsequent parts lack the work to abstract, generalize and standardize.

This conception is great. I hope a future where this is seen in IETF/W3C documents.

> target resource or service.

Author: Thx for the feedback, I've condensed much of this in the latest iteration. Likely more can be cut in future iterations.

10. The client now repeats the original request to the loop server, now
    attaching the L402 to the request.

11. The authentication server intercepts the request, extracts the L402 and
    validates it. Because the L402 is valid, the request is forwarded to the
    actual loop server that then initiates the swap.

12. The answer of the swap server is returned to the client and the swap is now
    initiated.

13. The whole process is fully transparent to the user. The only thing they
    might notice is a short delay of a few seconds on the first ever loop. Each
    successive loop will use the same credential and will not be delayed at
    all.

![e2e flow sequence diagram](bip-00026/e2e-flow.png)

**All further loops**:

1. For every new request to the server, the client now automatically attaches
   the credential that is stored locally.

2. As long as the credential has not expired, the steps 9-13 above will be
   followed.  If/when the credential expires, the server will start over at
   step 4 and instruct
   the client to obtain a fresh credential.

## L402 HTTP/gRPC Protocol Specification

This section defines the "L402" authentication scheme, which transmits

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Reviewer 7: The cryptographic properties of macaroons are desired, so the distinction is intentional.
Resources expounding on the application utility of these cryptographic properties are here: https://docs.lightning.engineering/the-lightning-network/l402/macaroons

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Author: >  and the thing that the server returns may be a macaroon, but from the perspective of this protocol, its just an opaque token.

The requirement here is that the API key itself commits to the payment hash within the invoice. This attribute is central to the protocol. Committing to the payment hash in the api key is what allows the reverse proxy implementing this protocol to be more or less stateless: given the pre-image and the macaroon (symmetric key hmac chain that includes a commitment to the payment hash in the chain), it can validate if an API key is complete or not. The API key here is a two-tuple of `(macaroon, preimage)`. 

This structure means that the reverse proxy doesn't need to maintain all the invoice state of the LN node it's connected to, and also doesn't need to hit an API to see if an invoice has been paid or not for each request. At high loads, such a requirement would prohibit many use cases. 

It's feasible that one could use JWT's or w/e (inheriting all the baggage) other structured API keys here, but then we'd also have to specify how for each of those, the committed payment hash is to be parsed and recognized. Macaroons are more or less less standardized in their structure (tons of implementations in various languages that can all parse the same macaroons), and in use elsewhere in other independent ecosystems. 

Devs are totally free to spin a similar protocol using PASETO or w/e another JWT alternatives of course. The goal of this document is to specify the L402 protocol as already defined and deployed in the wild. It's also worth noting that these headers are just for the L402 portion, the server being proxied to gets these headers and can interpret them if they wish, but can also layer w/e other authentication mechanism (oauth, etc, etc) as well.

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Reviewer 3: Kinda feel like there's a disagreement here in terms of what's in scope of the L402 nomenclature.

I'd classify it as the "data pieces and their format in the HTTP headers (or grpc calls)". Feels like there's a strong opinion herein to also include the authentication token format and specification, but it's pretty obvious to me that these are separable/unimportant from a *client's* perspective.

For any client that wants to know how to parse and pay/return a call from an L402 response, the auth token format is a distraction. In that case, the "data pieces and format" are all that really matter.

If there's other data or formatting that we should consider, that's probably worth documenting here. But the server side security/auth and/or how stateful/stateless it needs to be seems like an implementation detail.

> This structure means that the reverse proxy doesn't need to maintain all the invoice state of the LN node it's connected to, and also doesn't need to hit an API to see if an invoice has been paid or not for each request. 

This is a nice property that you can implement in any way/with a variety of tokens, but I'd argue that it's a "nice to have" of what you *can* do with the L402 tokens+preimages. You can also dumbly store state and do lookups (which you kinda have to do anyway for time-based access tokens / and or there different approaches to this).

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Author: >  but it's pretty obvious to me that these are separable/unimportant from a client's perspective.

Agreed, note that this information is only really relevant to the L402 proxy. The web service may still require the client to attach normal authentication information such as cookies or w/e other custom information. In most cases, the L402 proxy can be oblivious about the actual request information it's proxying, it only needs to ensure all the headers are copied over as normal. A client also doesn't have to introspect into the credential at all, it just encodes it with base64, then puts it where the server expects it. 

The expectation isn't that all active web services switch over to macaroons, it's that only the proxy needs to care about it, and otherwise the API backend can go unchanged. 

I've updated these sections to mention the optimization (committing to the hash in the credential), and weakened the language around verification.

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Reviewer 3: proxy // in-app HTTP handler middleware is baaaaaasically the same thing only difference is which machine it's running on, no?

I don't understand how *where* the L402 is being handled has a material impact on the specification of the "data pieces and their format" which is kiinda all we need from a spec?

> credentials as `<macaroon(s)>:<preimage>` pairs, where the preimage is encoded

Reviewer 2: So, I can see why there might be an argument to keeping the specification here agnostic on the encoding of the token itself, but as someone who has implemented this as a [middleware already](https://github.com/tierion/boltwall), I do think there are benefits to having this specified as well. By standardizing the full encoding you make the L402 token itself much more portable such that clients that don't have to have a relationship with the server itself in order to know how to decode and validate the macaroon. If the encoding is standardized, then any consumer of the L402 will know how to deserialize the macaroon portion, read the payment hash and validate against the preimage. 

There's also ecosystem benefits to having a system like this be cross-compatible. As an example, using the [LSAT Playground](https://lsat-playground.vercel.app/) (I guess I need to rebrand this now...) you can validate an L402 generated from boltwall or aperture, you can even take an L402 generated from aperture, [add a caveat](https://lsat-playground.vercel.app/#caveats) in the playgrond, and then have it validate against a server running boltwall middleware. You get additional benefits imo when you want to start running in environments like Nostr (if we could get L402 auth [standardized](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/compare/master...bucko13:nips:402-auth) for nostr) where you might have different clients and servers needing to interoperate, or something like https://sphinx.chat. 

This is particularly useful when caveats come in to play so that clients can introspect their token to see how much time might be left before their authorization expires for example. So all of this plays a pretty important role in the nature of these being stateless: even though it could be encoded in other ways, having it be standardized makes it far more portable. 

> I don't understand how where the L402 is being handled has a material impact on the specification of the "data pieces and their format" which is kiinda all we need from a spec?

Aren't the "data pieces and their format" covered by specifying the token being a base64 encoded macaroon?
